    </div></td><td width="32">Â </td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><div class="es-jasper-simpleCalendar" baseurl="/lkml/"></div><div class="threadlist">Messages in this thread</div><ul class="threadlist"><li class="root"><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/663">First message in thread</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/663">Andreas Gruenbacher</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/664">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/665">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/666">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/667">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/668">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/669">Andreas Gruenbacher</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/20/770">Catalin Marinas</a></li></ul></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/670">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/671">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/672">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/673">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/674">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/675">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/676">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/677">Andreas Gruenbacher</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/905">"Darrick J. Wong"</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/1135">Andreas Gruenbacher</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/1396">"Darrick J. Wong"</a></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/679">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/680">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/684">Andreas Gruenbacher</a></li><li class="origin"><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/925">Linus Torvalds</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/19/925">Bob Peterson</a></li><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/20/780">Catalin Marinas</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/20/1014">Linus Torvalds</a><ul><li><a href="/lkml/2021/10/20/1116">Catalin Marinas</a></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul></li></ul></td><td width="32" rowspan="2" class="c" valign="top"><img src="/images/icornerl.gif" width="32" height="32" alt="/" /></td><td class="c" rowspan="2" valign="top" style="padding-top: 1em"><table><tr><td colspan="2"><!--BuySellAds Zone Code--><div id="bsap_1297613" class="bsarocks bsap_5aa49c00cc06c882289a1dd6a5e50b62"></div><!--End BuySellAds Zone Code--></td></tr><tr><td><table><tr><td class="lp">From</td><td class="rp" itemprop="author">Linus Torvalds &lt;&gt;</td></tr><tr><td class="lp">Date</td><td class="rp" itemprop="datePublished">Tue, 19 Oct 2021 05:40:13 -1000</td></tr><tr><td class="lp">Subject</td><td class="rp" itemprop="name">Re: [PATCH v8 00/17] gfs2: Fix mmap + page fault deadlocks</td></tr></table></td><td><div class="shariff" data-services="[&quot;reddit&quot;]" data-theme="grey" data-lang="en" data-backend-url="//shariff.lkml.org/index.php"></div></td></tr></table><pre itemprop="articleBody">On Tue, Oct 19, 2021 at 3:42 AM Andreas Gruenbacher &lt;agruenba&#64;redhat.com&gt; wrote:<br />&gt;<br />&gt; From my point of view, the following questions remain:<br />&gt;<br />&gt;  * I hope these patches will be merged for v5.16, but what process<br />&gt;    should I follow for that?  The patch queue contains mm and iomap<br />&gt;    changes, so a pull request from the gfs2 tree would be unusual.<br /><br />Oh, I'd much rather get these as one pull request from the author and<br />from the person that actually ended up testing this.<br /><br />It might be "unusual", but it's certainly not unheard of, and trying<br />to push different parts of the series through different maintainers<br />would just cause lots of extra churn.<br /><br />Yes, normally I'd expect filesystem changes to have a diffstat that<br />clearly shows that "yes, it's all local to this filesystem", and when<br />I see anything else it raises red flags.<br /><br />But it raises red flags not because it would be wrong to have changes<br />to other parts, but simply because when cross-subsystem development<br />happens, it needs to be discussed and cleared with people. And you've<br />done that.<br /><br />So I'd take this as one pull request from you. You've been doing the<br />work, you get the questionable glory of being in charge of it all.<br />You'll get the blame too ;)<br /><br />&gt;  * Will Catalin Marinas's work for supporting arm64 sub-page faults<br />&gt;    be queued behind these patches?  We have an overlap in<br />&gt;    fault_in_[pages_]readable fault_in_[pages_]writeable, so one of<br />&gt;    the two patch queues will need some adjustments.<br /><br />I think that on the whole they should be developed separately, I don't<br />think it's going to be a particularly difficult conflict.<br /><br />That whole discussion does mean that I suspect that we'll have to<br />change fault_in_iov_iter_writeable() to do the "every 16 bytes" or<br />whatever thing, and make it use an actual atomic "add zero" or<br />whatever rather than walk the page tables. But that's a conceptually<br />separate discussion from this one, I wouldn't actually want to mix up<br />the two issues too much.<br /><br />Sure, they touch the same code, so there is _that_ overlap, but one is<br />about "the hardware rules are a-changing" and the other is about<br />filesystem use of - and expansion of - the things we do. Let's keep<br />them separate until ready, and then fix up the fallout at that point<br />(either as a merge resolution, or even partly after-the-fact).<br /><br />                     Linus<br /><br /></pre><div align="center"><div class="shariff" data-services="[&quot;reddit&quot;]" data-theme="grey" data-lang="en" data-backend-url="//shariff.lkml.org/index.php"></div></div></td><td width="32" rowspan="2" class="c" valign="top"><img src="/images/icornerr.gif" width="32" height="32" alt="\" /></td></tr><tr><td align="right" valign="bottom">
